---
title: "Digital Spartanism"
date: 2023-06-11
---

Hello again! I missed writing in May entirely. Life got busy and while I had interesting pontifications bouncing around my head, nothing really solidified. So I skipped it. Unfortunately they are still not solidifying but I'm going to get something down. Regarding monthly topics; on one hand I did great and on the other I totally let my themes go. Despite what I planned last month, to divide my topics into 2 to 3 different areas, I think this backfired and made me focus in on one to the detriment of the others. I did very little to learn Go/Javascript and almost entirely let my workout routine stop. This doesn't mean I didn't workout, but it was sporadic and uncoordinated, and there were weeks at a time I did nothing to "rest up" or get more sleep. On the other hand, barring a few days during busy travel work weeks, I made deliberate and consistent progress learning ROS and robotics almost every day! I *did* keep ROS as my topic for May and I think the focus helped. I'm sort of on a roll so I think I will continue with ROS for a third month, and then perhaps give up selecting topics altogether. The fact is there will always be a half a dozen interests I want to pursue, and while I will take time to write and reflect on them to keep some focus, It's eating at me saying I'll do one thing and then bouncing around again. Still not sure how to solve this...but I don't have any time pressure to do so either...we'll see what happens. 

**Digital Spartainism**

The title of this month's post is an idea I've had floating around in my head for a while but never put digital pen to paper. [^1] Please read this version of this article with a grain of salt, because I think I need to bounce this idea off others to refine what I mean by this, and come up with other examples to solidify the principle before I can decide if it is valuable and adopt it. [^2] The idea of spartanism is attractive in that stripping your life down to the absolute essentials lets you focus in on what really matters and get things done. Productivity from this perspective is almost impossible in modern society because not only do we rely on so many physical objects for daily life, the complexity of systems requires abstractions so layered, that literally no single person can see the whole of many systems we use daily. While I mean this in a very general sense, to include (but certainly not limited to) political systems, physical systems, economic systems, or any other system you might care to imagine, I'm particularly interested in the case of computer systems and the networks that connect them. 

A grecian Spartan would never own a computer. the idea of a fragile, finicky piece of hardware, complex and abstracted from the simple reality would not be a tool of value. But their society was not of the technical complexity of our own where you cannot exist without interfacing with the digital. So if there is something of the spartan idea that, given a baseline of material equipment that is required, we can keep as simple as possible to maximize our effectiveness? After all, even Spartans had their cloak, shield, spear and xiphos. The tools required by the society are only a matter of degree. 

Working as a programmer and technologist, I understand we are always aiming to optimize our workflows for speed and efficiency. Many tools exist that individuals adopt as a preference to other tools, but in turn cause a schism in the "standard" way of doing things. A few easy examples of this jump to mind. First, Vim vs. Emacs. Never mind the fact the there are a dozen IDEs out there that take the lack of standardization to an additional level of complexity. While some users are fluent in both Vim and Emacs, if you're speaking with a programmer who only knows one, and it's not the one with which you are familiar, minor inefficiencies emerge. If you are a programmer who is conversant in both, certainly additional time has been spent learning both that could have perhaps been spent learning something else. Is the "bilingual fluency" worth this trade off? Perhaps, perhaps not.[^3] Another example is QWERTY vs DVORAK keyboards. Some programmers learn to type on a whole new sequence of keyboard keys that in theory minimizes the amount of travel the fingers have to make to type in english. Similar DVORAK layouts exist for other languages. In this instance I don't feel it adheres to a principle of digital spartanism to learn DVORAK for two reasons. One, since most typists learn QWERTY from a young age, you must deliberately unlearn that system and invest a lot of time to regain the muscle memory to even use the new layout effectively. and Two, the second you sit down at another computer that doesn't have a DVORAK setting installed, you must either install one, (assuming you even have the system privileges) or switch back to QWERTY for the time being. Yes, it may be true for even a majority of programmers that their personal machine is the only machine they use 99% of the time, and for the rare case they don't they may have become quite proficient in switching settings quickly, but in my experience I switch machines and terminals often enough I don't think the effort is worth the minor gains. This concept could extend to what kinds of personal config files you keep/transfer that may not be available on another system or which programming languages to become proficient in for maximum effectiveness.

The question I am trying to answer is, in an age where absolute simplicity is no longer reasonable (or even possible), where is the line that separates highly specialized complexity that is only useful for one thing, and being so basic and generic that nothing is optimized at all. To borrow an analogy from one of my bosses, Are you the perfect japanese sushi knife, or the swiss army knife with 300 really poor tools? Where is the happy medium. The is another article adjacent to this one on being a "Digital Nomad", something I also find myself evaluating often as I travel for work in tech, that encompasses some of the ideas I would like to strive for. Digital spartanism certainly would assist the digital nomad in assembling the perfect subset of tools to take from place to place, and leave all else to acquire on site. Again, something that requires finding a happy medium. Deriving principles and techniques to optimize my ability to work in tech while also keeping things as simple as possible cut across both of these lines. Perhaps that is the topic for next month! until then... 

[^1]: Key to monitor?
[^2]: As I am writing this I am also identifying holes in the logic and feel it will require multiple rewrites to come out fully formed and coherent. Cut it some slack for now! :) 
[^3]: There is a connection here to meta-learning that I won't explore for now that focuses on the idea of picking a deliberate subset of skills that are broadly applicable in a variety of areas to further increase future learning potential.  