---
title: "A Masters Degree and an Afternoon..."
date: 203-04-07
---

This month serves two purposes, first, to update the next topic of the month (as usual), but also to write a blog on a recent project that I did because of some stuff my company is working on. This project involving AIS ship transmission subsequently led one of my bosses to ask I write up a little more thoroughly because it highlights some themes that are relevant to what we are doing, namely, that the tech we are developing isn't extraordinary, it's just deliberate. 

First a quick update on March; Unqualified success. I easily moved into the exact parameters I set for myself, namely, working out to re-establish patterns, working out 6 days a week (I was actually up to 7 some weeks), working out to the point where I sweat, and setting myself up to continue building. I set this up so much in fact, I think I'm going to continue this sub-topic every month, and divide the monthly update into two sections; Physical goals and intellectual goals. (If I'm really feeling squirrely, I might even add spiritual goals including philosophy and meditation). For the month ahead, physical goals will be to continue my 6 days/week streak  with a minimum of cardio and calisthenics every day, OR strength training with weights. I'm going to start slow with the weights and just go for 2/6 days, and elevate from there. Regarding my extended goals of programming education, I had additional mixed success. I'm still working though a JavaScript book, and while I haven't deliberately learned any Go in the past month, on two separate occasions I reviewed some Go code and it was fairly transparent to me. This gratified my efforts thus far that the small bit I've learned stuck. My one worry is that all my monthly topics will become extended topics and I'll end up right back where I started trying to do too much. Thus far, doing something physical and something intellectual seems manageable, but at some point I'll need to deliberately swap something out....more to follow in the months ahead. 

Ok, onto April's Topic. I very much want to make April about ROS, as so I shall. :) however, this is a bit of an undertaking not well suited to travel and as we are a week into the month already I don't think I would be able to start in ernest until I return halfway though the month. So this might be a 2-month topic (or longer!!). Of course, as long as I'm with this company, travel probably won't slow, so maybe I just need to buckle down and get it done. The specific goals of this project are to get any one of my robots (preferably the arm) working under ROS control and hopefully, tele-controlled by my Steam Deck. Which reminds me, ROS 2 *is* fully installed on my Steam Deck, including Rviz and Gazebo, and I have QGroundControl Appimage running on the gaming side no problem, but it doesn't communicate with the USB hub just yet so it can't actually do anything other than plan and manage missions. Not nothing, but more to do.  

**A Masters Degree and a Weekend** 

Radio is hard, except, sometimes it's not. On a whim this last weekend I dug out a SDR dongle I had left over from a project during grad school and decided to google around until I found some open-source software to read AIS transmissions from marine vessels and view them on some mapping software. I did this because one of the applications my company **TurbineOne** is working on is tangentially related to the location of ships we detect when a surveillance drone flies over and spots them. The easiest way to corroborate this data is the Automatic Identification System (AIS) emissions from marine vessels world wide. While not mandatory in all regions, many vessels voluntarily transmit their location, size, vessel ID and a host of other communications to aid in collision avoidance and navigation. If you can pull this data its easy to confirm that a vessel may be where you think it is, and you can then use AIS data to track the location into the future (at least until the transmitter is turned off). Data aggregation services will sell you worldwide AIS data for pennies, but I live near the Boston Harbor, so I wanted to see if I could pull some of this data myself. Within half an hour I had found [AIS-catcher](https://github.com/jvde-github/AIS-catcher), installed it on my computer, configured my RTL-SRD dongle and had a browser window open watching streams of transmission from the boats in my local waterways popping up as dots (and even vessel "outlines") on my screen. I thought this was pretty cool! I even saw one vessel was docked and not too far from my home. My dog needed a walk, so I noted the location and name of the ship and went to see if I could find it. 20 min later, boom! there is was! Right where my SRD system reported. Ok, so this isn't magic... A ship sent a radio message saying "Here I am" and low and behold, it was in that spot. Wow! But on the other hand this is kind of cool. AIS isn't intended for random people sitting in their house, it's intended for other ships. the coast guards and people in the Maritime industry to run all sorts of cost maximization and risk mitigation to make logistics run smoothly. And all it took for me to see this myself was to plug a $40 USB dongle into my computer. I say 30 min because that is truly the time it took to google, find, install and run the software. But on the other hand the know how to find the right search terms, understand the code building and install procedures, and parsing the somewhat obscure commands to make the software run, has been a 6-7 year long experiment dating back to when I started messing around with electronics again in 2016. It's easy, but only if you happen to have the know how. 

I'll give you another story from when I was on the uninitiated side of the technology fence. Software Defined Radios (SRD) are unique pieces of radio equipment because (among other reasons) the can capture a incredibly broad range of the radio spectrum with a very cheep, readily available device in a small package. No longer do you need precisely measured antennas and tuners to pick up the specific signals you're aiming to receive. You can use the device to pick up AIS data, sure, but all at the same time you can pick up regular AM/FM radio, amateur radio bands, and another fun protocol similar to AIS called ADS-B. This is almost identical in purpose to AIS but for airplanes instead of boats. My first experience with ADS-B was in Afghanistan when one of my soldiers plugged in a SRD dongle in his computer, called me over, and showed me, no kidding, military drones broadcasting their positions above our heads. Now, we were near a military airfield when this happened, and I'm sure the benefits of ADS-B in an area where an enemy may already know aircraft will be present, outweigh the costs of transmitting exact locations of the same. For all I know this was intentional and outside a certain radius of the airfield they switch off the transmission and are stealth as can be. However, this was still concerning. It's not at all hard to imagine a somewhat educated Afghan, antagonistic to the american presence, would be able to gain the relatively low level of know how to plug a $40 device into a $100 computer and figure out exactly where the drones are looong before they get to their location. So my sergeant wrote a report and sent it up the chain. A few weeks later, we still saw the ADS-B data for many other aircraft, but no longer saw the drones. It could have been unrelated, but it was interesting. 

Once I returned home from my walk with my dog, chuffed I was actually able to find the ship, I decided to find, download and install and ADS-B software as well. Minutes later I had reconfigured my SRD into a whole other kind of radio watching planes takeoff and land at Logan International. That got me thinking about radio again in general. A trip back to the "unused electronics" cubby in my home office and out came the HackRF and Wifi-Pineapple. These, to be fair, are slightly more expensive than $40, but still well within a price threshold of a hobbyist, to give capability that is easily commercial grade. All of a sudden, my personal computer turned into a wireless vacuum able to soak up radio protocols down to 1Mhz all the way up to 6GHz (and transmit on the same). This includes all the aforementioned protocols, but also includes Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. And with a host of associated open source software, I now had the hypothetical capability to get anything from garage door openers and home automation devices all the way to Security systems and Nanny-cams (encryption protocols notwithstanding...) without writing a single line of code.[^1]. 



The punchline to these stories is this; while not everyone can simply plug in a thing and make it go (I've been on both sides of the equation) technological problems are often more or less solved. If you're in the group of people who is in the know, it is no longer hard. It is then their job to make the thing that was hard for them, no longer hard for everyone else. Literally every day since the 1950's *most* Americans have been users of radio technology just by getting in their car and tuning one dial until catchy tunes came piping out the other end. It's not hard. Today almost all Americans use mobile devices that rely on entirely different schemes of transmission to move the data, but all rely on Radio at a backbone, and watch YouTube, make video calls and send emails. It's not hard. AIS transmissions are just one of literally thousands of methods to move data, and all anyone needs is the right, inexpensive, hardware, *and* the right software to make it go. TurbineOne is a company that makes machine learning meta-platforms that abstracts the "hard" parts of making artificial intelligence work for you. Machine Learning is Hard. [^2] But now for our users, Machine Learning is easy. We have simply continued the trend of taking the aspects of a relatively well understood technology and breaking it down into a form that everyday people can apply it and make it useful. The whole radio project described above was actually just my personal foray exploring how we might start processing streams of radio data to make machine learning detections in addition to processing video and imagery data that is currently focus of our company and the need of the majority of our customers. But companies like TurbineOne and the previously non-existant tools coming out of our work highlights our industries ability to to translate what it took years to understand and learn, and make something cool and useful, in literally an afternoon. 

NOTE: Needs something to connect the thread of "something for me that was hard, now isn't hard becauseI worked at it for years and now understand it" to "things that are hard and on the edge of understanding for people like me, are now translated into a thing that isn't hard for anyone. Maybe rewrite the conclusion. 


[^1]: I'll fully admit I have not played with or pulled in all of these devices listed recently, but I have done some of them in the past, and proof of concept articles, easily google-able, show that I do not exaggerate the capability. 
[^2]: We have a PhD on our staff specifically to help us grapple with some of the more esoteric emerging concepts as research is continues in this space.

